Łódź was once a small settlement that first appeared in written records in around 1332.
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
In the early 15th century it was granted city rights, but remained a rather small and
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
insubstantial town. It was the property of Kuyavian bishops and clergy until the end of
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
the 18th century, when Łódź was annexed by Prussia as a result of the second partition 
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
of Poland. Following the collapse of the independent Duchy of Warsaw, the city became part
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
of Congress Poland, a client state of the Russian Empire. It was then that Łódź
experienced rapid growth in the cloth industry and in population due to the inflow of migrants,
most notably Germans and Jews. Ever since the industrialization of the area, the city
has struggled with many difficulties such as multinationalism and social inequality, 
which were vividly documented in the novel The Promised Land written by Polish Nobel
Prize-winning author Władysław Reymont. The contrasts greatly reflected on the architecture
of the city, where luxurious mansions coexisted with redbrick factories and dilapidated tenement houses.
After Poland regained its independence in 1918, Łódź grew to be one of the largest
Polish cities and one of the most multicultural and industrial centers in Europe.
The interbellum period saw rapid development in education and healthcare. 
After the invasion of Poland in 1939, the German Army captured the city and 
renamed it Litzmannstadt in honour of the German general Karl Litzmann, who was
victorious near the area during World War I. The city's large Jewish population 
was forced into a walled zone known as the Łódź Ghetto, from which they were sent 
to German concentration and extermination camps. Following the occupation of the 
city by the Soviet Army, Łódź, which sustained insignificant[8] damage during the war,
became part of the newly established Polish People's Republic. 
