The Battle of Thermopylae was fought between an alliance of Greek city-states,
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
led by King Leonidas of Sparta, and the Persian Empire of Xerxes I over the
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
course of three days, during the second Persian invasion of Greece.
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
A Greek force of approximately 7,000 men marched north to block
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
the pass in the middle of 480 BC. The Persian army, alleged by 
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
the ancient sources to have numbered over one million, but today 
considered to have been much smaller (various figures are given 
by scholars, ranging between about 100,000 and 150,000)[11][12] 
arrived at the pass in late August or early September. The vastly 
outnumbered Greeks held off the Persians for seven days 
(including three of battle) before the rear-guard was annihilated 
in one of history's most famous last stands. During two full days 
of battle, the small force led by Leonidas blocked the only road 
by which the massive Persian army could pass. After the second day,
 a local resident named Ephialtes betrayed the Greeks by revealing 
a small path used by shepherds. It led the Persians behind the Greek 
lines. Leonidas, aware that his force was being outflanked, dismissed
 the bulk of the Greek army and remained to guard their retreat with 
300 Spartans and 700 Thespians, fighting to the death. Others also 
reportedly remained, including up to 900 helots and 400 Thebans; most
 of these Thebans reportedly surrendered.
Themistocles was in command of the Greek Navy at Artemisium when he 
received news that the Persians had taken the pass at Thermopylae.
 Since the Greek strategy required both Thermopylae and Artemisium 
to be held, given their losses, it was decided to withdraw to Salamis. 
The Persians overran Boeotia and then captured the evacuated Athens. 
The Greek fleet—seeking a decisive victory over the Persian armada—attacked 
and defeated the invaders at the Battle of Salamis in late 480 BC. Wary of
 being trapped in Europe, Xerxes withdrew with much of his army to Asia 
(losing most to starvation and disease), leaving Mardonius to attempt to 
complete the conquest of Greece. However, the following year saw a Greek 
army decisively defeat the Persians at the Battle of Plataea, thereby ending the Persian invasion. 
